# P1 : k3s with vagrant

In this part of the project, we automate the deployment of a simple k3s cluster, using vagrant for provisioning the VM and simple scripts for configuring it.

## Deployment files

### 1️⃣ Vagrantfile

The **Vagrantfile** is here to describe the VM configuration, so that Vagrant can automatially configure and deploy the VMs. It includes the following info :
- **Virtual machines** : for this project, we need 2 machines : a server and a worker
- **Network config** : each VM will be given a statit IP address, in order to facilitate communication between the 2 nodes.
- **VMs resources** : depending on the usage, we can adjust such elements as memory or the number of allocated CPUs for each machine
- **Provision** : each machine needs its own configuration, so they each have their own scripts (aptly named `server.sh` for the server, and `agent.sh` for the agent)


### 2️⃣ **conf/conf.yaml**

The variables needed for the configuration are in `conf/conf.yaml`. You can make any change before creating the VMs with `vagrant up`. If you make any change while the VMs are up, you need to re-provision the changes with ```vagrant reload --provision```


### 3️⃣ **scripts/server.sh**

The `server.sh` script installs and configure k3s for the server node of the cluster:
1. **Install k3s in server mode** : downloads and install k3s, so that the server can act as the control plane of the Kubernetes cluster and use kubctl by default. This means that the server will be configured as mster node of the custer.
2. **Token creation** : generates a token file in the `token/` directory, so that the agent can join the cluster.


### 4️⃣ **scripts/agent.sh**

The `agent.sh` script installs and configure k3s on the worker node of the cluster:
1. **Install k3s in worker mode** : downloads and install k3s in agent mode, so that the machine can join the cluster. However, by default it cannot use kubectl.
2. **Join the cluster** : using the `node-token` generated by the server, the worker joins the cluster as a new node


## ⚙️ Installation


### Start Vagrant

```sh
vagrant up
```

This creates 2 VMs, each with thei own (predefined) IP address.

### Commands

- to SSH into a VM :

```sh
vagrant ssh <VM_NAME>
```

- check cluster availability :

Once you've beean able to ssh into a machine, do:
```sh
sudo kubectl get nodes -o wide
```
If everything is OK, both node should show up with `Ready` status.

- stop the VMs :

```sh
vagrant halt
```

- (re)start the VMs :

```sh
vagrant up
```

- destroy the VMs :

```sh
vagrant destroy -f
```